src/content/blog/cantor-set.md, before:

---
title: "Reflections on the Cantor Set and My Journey Through Topology"
pubDate: "2024-05-09"
description: "How the Cantor set and compactness helped reshape my intuition for infinity, structure, and rigor in topology."
author: "Jorge Guzman"
tags: ["topology", "math reflections", "compactness", "measure theory"]
image: "../images/cantor_set_plot.png"
---

This semester, I immersed myself in topology for the first time—and one of the most fascinating, mind-bending concepts I encountered was the **Cantor set**. What began as a seemingly simple construction—repeatedly removing the middle third from an interval—quickly unfolded into a set so rich with mathematical depth that it fundamentally changed the way I think about structure, continuity, and infinity.

## What is the Cantor Set?

<p>
The Cantor set is constructed from the closed interval $[0, 1]$ by removing the open middle third $(1/3, 2/3)$. Then, from the remaining two intervals $[0, 1/3]$ and $[2/3, 1]$, we again remove the open middle third from each, and continue this process <em>ad infinitum</em>.
</p>


Despite being created by deleting intervals repeatedly, the resulting set:
- Contains **uncountably infinitely many** points
- Has **measure zero** (takes up no “length”)
- Is **closed**, **perfect**, and **totally disconnected**

Here's a visual representation of its construction up to 5 levels:

![Cantor Set Construction](/images/cantor_set_plot.png)

Each horizontal line above shows the remaining intervals after each iteration. Notice how quickly the set becomes fragmented—and yet, incredibly, an uncountable number of points remain.

## Why It Shocked Me

Early in the semester, I found myself clinging to intuition rooted in geometry and calculus. But the Cantor set shattered those instincts:

- How can a set be **nowhere dense** but still **uncountable**?
- How can it **contain no intervals**, yet be **perfect** (every point is a limit point)?
- How can its total length shrink to zero, yet never fully disappear?

### Theorems That Changed My Perspective

**Theorem**: *The Lebesgue measure of the Cantor set is 0.*

This follows from the geometric series:

$$
\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \frac{2^{n-1}}{3^n} = 1
$$

**Theorem**: *The Cantor set is uncountable.*

This is often proven by constructing a bijection between the Cantor set and the set of all infinite binary sequences—hinting at deep connections with set theory and symbolic dynamics.

## The Cantor Set and My Growth

Encountering this paradoxical object taught me something about math and about myself:

1. **Mathematics isn’t about confirming intuition**—it’s about building *new* ones.
2. I saw firsthand how **rigor and abstraction** can clarify, rather than obscure, our understanding.
3. I learned to think in terms of **structures and properties** rather than pictures alone.

One of the most profound concepts I encountered in this course was **compactness**. Initially abstract, I slowly began to see its power. The Cantor set, despite being so fragmented, is compact—it is both closed and bounded.

## A Compactness Example That Clicked for Me

I later came across an informal visualization that really resonated with me: imagine a tiny ant crawling around on a shape. If the space is compact, no matter how the ant moves, it can’t “escape” to infinity—there’s always a limit point, always a place it will cluster around. It helped me understand why compactness is so central in analysis: it ensures that functions behave well, sequences converge, and mathematical chaos has boundaries.

![Compactness Ant Path](/images/compactness_ant_plot.png)

*In this illustration, the circle represents a compact space. The ant, wandering around, is always contained—showing that compactness ensures the presence of limit points and prevents escape to infinity.*

## A Bit of Code for Fun 🐍

Here's a simple Python script that draws the Cantor set using recursion:

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

def cantor_set(ax, x, y, length, depth):
    if depth == 0:
        ax.hlines(y, x, x + length, colors='black', linewidth=2)
    else:
        third = length / 3
        cantor_set(ax, x, y, third, depth - 1)
        cantor_set(ax, x + 2 * third, y, third, depth - 1)

fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8, 5))
ax.set_title("Construction of the Cantor Set (up to 5 levels)")
ax.set_xlim(0, 1)
ax.set_ylim(-0.5, 5.5)
ax.axis('off')

for i in range(6):
    cantor_set(ax, 0, i, 1, i)

plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()

Commit message:

Add Cantor set banner and clean construction diagram

src/content/blog/cantor-set.md, after:

---
title: "Reflections on the Cantor Set and My Journey Through Topology"
pubDate: "2024-05-09"
description: "How the Cantor set and compactness helped reshape my intuition for infinity, structure, and rigor in topology."
author: "Jorge Guzman"
tags: ["topology", "math reflections", "compactness", "measure theory"]
heroImage: '/cantor_set_banner_960x480.png'
---

This semester, I immersed myself in topology for the first time—and one of the most fascinating, mind-bending concepts I encountered was the **Cantor set**. What began as a seemingly simple construction—repeatedly removing the middle third from an interval—quickly unfolded into a set so rich with mathematical depth that it fundamentally changed the way I think about structure, continuity, and infinity.

## What is the Cantor Set?

<p>
The Cantor set is constructed from the closed interval $[0, 1]$ by removing the open middle third $(1/3, 2/3)$. Then, from the remaining two intervals $[0, 1/3]$ and $[2/3, 1]$, we again remove the open middle third from each, and continue this process <em>ad infinitum</em>.
</p>


Despite being created by deleting intervals repeatedly, the resulting set:
- Contains **uncountably infinitely many** points
- Has **measure zero** (takes up no “length”)
- Is **closed**, **perfect**, and **totally disconnected**

Here's a visual representation of its construction up to 5 levels:

![Cantor Set Construction](/images/cantor_set_clean.png)

Each horizontal line above shows the remaining intervals after each iteration. Notice how quickly the set becomes fragmented—and yet, incredibly, an uncountable number of points remain.

## Why It Shocked Me

Early in the semester, I found myself clinging to intuition rooted in geometry and calculus. But the Cantor set shattered those instincts:

- How can a set be **nowhere dense** but still **uncountable**?
- How can it **contain no intervals**, yet be **perfect** (every point is a limit point)?
- How can its total length shrink to zero, yet never fully disappear?

### Theorems That Changed My Perspective

**Theorem**: *The Lebesgue measure of the Cantor set is 0.*

This follows from the geometric series:

$$
\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \frac{2^{n-1}}{3^n} = 1
$$

**Theorem**: *The Cantor set is uncountable.*

This is often proven by constructing a bijection between the Cantor set and the set of all infinite binary sequences—hinting at deep connections with set theory and symbolic dynamics.

## The Cantor Set and My Growth

Encountering this paradoxical object taught me something about math and about myself:

1. **Mathematics isn’t about confirming intuition**—it’s about building *new* ones.
2. I saw firsthand how **rigor and abstraction** can clarify, rather than obscure, our understanding.
3. I learned to think in terms of **structures and properties** rather than pictures alone.

One of the most profound concepts I encountered in this course was **compactness**. Initially abstract, I slowly began to see its power. The Cantor set, despite being so fragmented, is compact—it is both closed and bounded.

## A Compactness Example That Clicked for Me

I later came across an informal visualization that really resonated with me: imagine a tiny ant crawling around on a shape. If the space is compact, no matter how the ant moves, it can’t “escape” to infinity—there’s always a limit point, always a place it will cluster around. It helped me understand why compactness is so central in analysis: it ensures that functions behave well, sequences converge, and mathematical chaos has boundaries.

![Compactness Ant Path](/images/compactness_ant_plot.png)

*In this illustration, the circle represents a compact space. The ant, wandering around, is always contained—showing that compactness ensures the presence of limit points and prevents escape to infinity.*

## A Bit of Code for Fun 🐍

Here's a simple Python script that draws the Cantor set using recursion:

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

def cantor_set(ax, x, y, length, depth):
    if depth == 0:
        ax.hlines(y, x, x + length, colors='black', linewidth=2)
    else:
        third = length / 3
        cantor_set(ax, x, y, third, depth - 1)
        cantor_set(ax, x + 2 * third, y, third, depth - 1)

fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8, 5))
ax.set_title("Construction of the Cantor Set (up to 5 levels)")
ax.set_xlim(0, 1)
ax.set_ylim(-0.5, 5.5)
ax.axis('off')

for i in range(6):
    cantor_set(ax, 0, i, 1, i)

plt.tight_layout()
plt.show() 

```
## Looking Forward

As I prepare to apply for PhD programs in pure mathematics, I realize this class didn’t just teach me topology—it helped shape the kind of mathematician I want to be. I want to keep asking questions that surprise me. I want to live in the tension between intuition and rigor. I want to contribute to conversations that explore the limits of mathematical understanding.

The Cantor set was a humbling and inspiring chapter in that journey.

Thanks for reading. If you're also into topology, or just love math that messes with your head, feel free to reach out!
